* Cooling
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: cooling
  :END:

** Basics
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: subsec:cooling
   :END:

Cooling time $$\label{eq:cooling}
  \frac{d{\cal E}}{dt} = n^2(\Gamma - \Lambda)$$ and
${\cal E} = \frac{3}{2} nkT$, therefore $$\label{eq:tcool}
  t_{\rm cool} = \frac{3}{2} \frac{kT}{n \Lambda} = 0.66~{\rm yr} \; \left( \frac{n}{{\rm cm}^{3}} \right)^{-1} \left( \frac{T}{{\rm K}} \right) \left( \frac{\Lambda}{10^{-23}~{\rm erg}~{\rm cm}^3~{\rm s}^{-1}} \right)^{-1}$$

** Basic Radiative Processes (MBW Sec 8.1)
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: basic-radiative-processes-mbw-sec-8.1
   :END:

*** Compton Cooling
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: compton-cooling
    :END:

Photons pass through a thermal gas of non-relativistic electrons,
electrons lose energy to the radiation field when $T_\gamma \ll T_e$,
causing the gas to cool. The cooling rate per unit volume is expressed
as $${\cal E}_{\rm Comp} = \frac{\dif u_\gamma}{\dif t} =
\frac{4k_BT_e}{m_ec^2}c\sigma_Tn_ea_rT_\gamma^4 \propto n_e T_e T_\gamma^4
  \label{eq:compton}$$ For a fully ionized gas of primordial composition
($Y_P \simeq 1/4$), the cooling time scale is
$$t_{\rm Comp} \approx \frac{3k_BT_en_e}{{\cal E}_{\rm Comp}} =
  \frac{3m_ec}{4\sigma_Ta_rT_\gamma^4},
  \label{eq:tcomp}$$ provided $T_e \gg T_\gamma$.

**** Cooling against CMB.
     :PROPERTIES:
     :CUSTOM_ID: cooling-against-cmb.
     :END:

The temperature of the CMB changes with redshift as
$T_\gamma \approx 2.73(1+z)$K. It can be shown that this time scale is
smaller than the Hubble time only at $z \gtrsim 6$, therefore Compton
cooling against the CMB is only important for gas at high redshifts.

*** Radiative Cooling
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: sec:radcool
    :END:

This is the primary cooling processes relevant for structure formation.
Radiative cooling is the processes in which gas loses energy through
radiation as a result of two-body interaction. At $T>10^6$ K (almost
fully ionized), the only significant radiative cooling process is
bremsstrahlung. The volume cooling rate is related to the bremsstrahlung
emissivity $\varepsilon_{\rm ff}$ through $$\begin{aligned}
  {\cal E}_{\rm ff} &= \int \varepsilon_{\rm ff}(\nu) \dif \nu \nonumber \\
  & \approx \num{1.4e-23} T_8^{1/2} \left( \frac{n_e}{{\rm cm}^{-3}} \right)^2
  \si{erg.s^{-1}.cm^{-3}}
  \label{eq:eff}\end{aligned}$$ assuming a charge number of unity and
$n_i \sim n_e$.

At lower temperatures, $10^4 \lesssim T \lesssim 10^6$ K, in regions,
other important processes are:

- Collisional ionization: atoms are ionized by collisions with
  electrons.

- Recombination: atoms recombines with an ion, emitting a photon.

- Collisional excitation: atoms are first excited by collisions with
  electrons and then decay radiatively to the ground state.

The cooling rates of the cosmic gas (rich in hydrogen), combining all
effects, is represented by the cooling function defined as
$\Lambda(T) \equiv {\cal E}/n_{\rm H}^2$, shown in
Fig. [[#fig:cooling][1]], assuming that the gas is optically thin to the
emitted photons. A large fraction of the electrons are bound to their
atoms when $T<10^{5.5}$ K. The peaks, from left to right, are due to
collisionally excited electronic levels of H$^0$ and He$^+$, and of
oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, etc for enriched gas.

#+CAPTION: Equilibrium cooling functions, calculated by solving
population densities of all ions. The processes included are:
collisional excitation of H$^0$ and He$^+$, ionization of H$^0$, He$^0$,
and He$^+$, recombination of H$^+$, He$^+$, and He$^{++}$, and free-free
of all ions. (Copied from MBW, Fig. 8.1, Pg 369.)
[[file:figures/f1_cooling.png]]

*** Cooling below $10^4$ K
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: cooling-below-104-k
    :END:

At temperatures below $10^4$, most of the electrons have recombined.
Cooling at this temperature range is possible if the gas is enriched.

- Collisions with neutral hydrogen atoms and with the few free electrons
  left can excite the fine structure levels of low ions, such as OI,
  OII, OIII, and CII.

- Collisional excitation of the rotational/vibrational levels of
  molecules (H$_2$, CO, etc) at low temperature.

significant amounts of molecular hydrogen can form in the gas. The
reactions for H$_2$ formation are: $$\begin{aligned}
  \md{H}^0 + \md{e} \rightarrow \md{H}^- + \gamma,\;\; &\md{H}^- + \md{H}^0
  \rightarrow
  \md{H}_2 +
  e;\\
  \md{H}^+ + \md{H}^0 \rightarrow \md{H}_2^+ + \gamma,\;\; &\md{H}_2^+ + \md{H}^0
  \rightarrow
  \md{H}_2 + \md{H}^+.\end{aligned}$$

In enriched gas, collisions with few free electrons can excite the fine
structure levels of low ions, such as OI, OII, OIII and If

** In RAMSES
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: subsec:coolramses
   :END:

*** Radiative Cooling
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: radiative-cooling
    :END:

\citep{Geen:2016} In RAMSES the cooling in neutral gas is the
prescription of Audit & Hennebelle (2005), which includes carbon, oxygen
and dust grains as well as the ambient UV background in the ISM,
transitioning to Sutherland & Dopita (1993) above $10^4$ K (see
Sec. [[#sec:radcool][1.2.2]]).

A further 'photoionised' cooling function that is a piecewise fit to
Ferland (2003) is implemented, as in Rosdahl et al. (2013). In all our
simulations, unless specifically stated, we assume a cooling function
for a gas with solar metallicity.

** Radiative Transfer
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: radiative-transfer
   :END:

Ref: \cite{Rosdahl:2013}.

Summary: RAMSES-RT uses the moment method with M1 Eddington tensor
closure.

- Radiative transfer (RT) is performed on the AMR grid with a
  first-order Godunov method using the *M1 closure* for the Eddington
  tensor, and is coupled to the hydrodynamics via non-equilibrium
  thermochemistry of hydrogen and helium. This *moment-based* approach
  has the great advantage that the computational cost is independent of
  the number of radiative sources.

- No radiation pressure.
